lable at ScienceDirect
Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28Contents lists avaiBiochimie
journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/b iochiResearch paperStructural features and activity of Brazzein and its mutants upon
substitution of a surfaced exposed alanine
Parisa Ghanavatian a, Khosrow Khalifeh b, Vahab Jafarian a, *
a Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Zanjan, Zanjan, Iran
b Laboratory of Biophysics, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Zanjan, Zanjan, Irana r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 March 2016
Received in revised form
6 September 2016
Accepted 6 September 2016
Available online 8 September 2016
Keywords:
Brazzein
Site-directed mutagenesis
Sweetness
Docking
Equilibrium
Interaction* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: V.Jafarian@znu.ac.ir (V. Jafarian).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2016.09.006
0300-9084/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. and Société Françaisea b s t r a c t
Brazzein (Brz) is a member of sweet-tasting protein containing four disulfide bonds. It was reported as a
compact and heat-resistant protein. Here, we have used site-directed mutagenesis and replaced a
surface-exposed alanine with aspartic acid (A19D mutant), lysine (A19K mutant) and glycine (A19G
mutant). Activity comparisons of wild-type (WT) and mutants using taste panel test procedure showed
that A19G variant has the same activity as WT protein. However, introduction of a positive charge in
A19K mutant led to significant increase in Brz's sweetness, while A19D has reduced sweetness compared
to WT protein. Docking studies showed that mutation at position 19 results in slight chain mobility of
protein at the binding surface and changing the patterns of interactions toward more effective binding of
E9K variant in the concave surface of sweet taste receptor. Far-UV CD data spectra have a characteristic
shape of beta structure for all variants, however different magnitudes of spectra suggest that beta-sheet
structure in WT and A19G is more stable than that of A19D and A19K. Equilibrium unfolding studies with
fluorescence spectroscopy and using urea and dithiothritol (DTT) as chemical denaturants indicates that
A19G mutant gains more stability against urea denaturation; while conformational stability of A19D and
A19K decreases when compared with WT and A19G variants. We concluded that the positive charge at
the surface of protein is important factor responsible for the interaction of protein with the human sweet
receptor and Ala19 can be considered as a key region for investigating the mechanism of the interaction
of Brz with corresponding receptor.
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights
reserved.1. Introduction Its solution structure with nuclear magnetic resonance spectros-In recent years, demands for natural and healthy sweeteners
with low calorie instead of traditional sweeteners like sucrose have
been increased. So the need for sweet tasting proteins as alternative
sweeteners seems to be essential in food industry [1]. Among all
sweet tasting proteins, Brazzein (Brz) as one of the smallest protein
is an appropriate model protein for both academic studies and food
industry considering its specific features such as high level of
sweetening potency, thermo stability and wide range of pH toler-
ability [2e4]. It has a compact structure containing four disulfide
bonds which exists in two forms; namely major and minor struc-
tures with 54 and 53 residues, respectively [5].
The structural data of major structure includes crystal (PDB
code: 4HE7) and solution state structures (PDB codes: 1BRZ and
2BRZ). Other reported structures include four solution-NMR
structures of minor form (pdb codes: 2LY5, 2LY6, 2KYQ, 2KGQ).de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculcopy (pdb code: 2BRZ) indicates that it consists of three strands of
antiparallel beta-sheet and a short alpha-helix joined together by
loops. However, an additional a-helix was also reported in protein
data bank (pdb codes: 4HE7, 2LY5) [6].
A brief review of previous studies reveals that majority of in-
vestigations have been conducted for determining of factors
responsible for sweetening features of the protein [7e13]. Among
them, more studies have been performed by means of site-directed
mutagenesis to identify the key residues and regions of the protein
which are important in the sweetening power of Brz [9,14e17]. The
majority of these investigations emphasized the importance of
surfaced-exposed regions of protein and the proportion of its sur-
ficial charge to the whole length of protein. As an example, it was
revealed that two regions of Brz including C and T-terminals of the
proteins and a flexible loop around Arg43 have an outstanding role
in sweetening property [9,12].
Furthermore, studies by combination of electrophysiological
record and site-directed mutagenesis showed that the effect ofaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28 21charge on sweetening potency of Brz is muchmore than that of side
chain's length [12,14]. In addition, there are other reports about the
relationship between sweetening power and intera-molecular
hydrogen bonds on the protein structure [8].
As we know, physico-chemical features of various amino acids
including the size and kind of side chain are the key factors in
determining the folding kinetics and thermodynamic stability [18].
Among them, hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of the amino acids
and their location on the protein structure are very important
properties that can influence the conformational stability of dis-
solved proteins in polar environments [19]. In spite of various
studies, few attempts have been performed on the structural fea-
tures of Brz regarding its thermodynamic characterization and
conformational stability.
According to the 1H,15N-HSQC-NMR studies on two variants of
Brz it was recently shown that increasing the flexibility of protein
may allow protein to interact more strongly with the G-protein
coupled human sweet receptor. They reported that substitution of
Aspartic acid with Lysine (D40K) and increasing the net charge of
protein toward positive charge (D40K mutant) leads to alterations
in local conformational and dynamic of protein accompanied by
three-fold enhancement of protein activity [20]. They also sug-
gested that three regions of Brz known as sites 1, 2 and 3 are
essential for interaction with sweet taste receptor.
We previously investigated the effect of charge alteration at
position 9 (starting point of site 3) of Brz and found that changing
the charge from negative to positive at the surface of protein can
influence its sweetness power [21]. In this study, we designed three
mutants of Brz using bioinformatics tools and substituted Ala19
(The end of site 3) by lysine (A19K mutant), Aspartic acid (A19D
mutant) and glycine (A19G mutant). Upon construction of recom-
binant proteins, the sweetness of protein variants was measured by
taste panel test. Structural properties and thermodynamic stability
were also determined by fluorescence and circular dichroism
spectroscopy as well as isothermal urea denaturation experiments.
According to structural data and in spite of high thermos-stability
of Brz, we found that the conformational stability of A19D and
A19K mutants against chemical denaturant is lower than that of
WT protein. It was also revealed that the A19K mutant has higher
sweetness power in comparison with other proteins.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Materials
E. coli strain SHuffle® from New England Biolabs (www.neb.
com) and protein expression vector pET-28a (þ) used in this
study were supplied by Novagen (Novagen, Madison, WI, USA).
Synthesis of the DNA primers for mutagenesis and DNA sequencing
was performed by bioneer (Korean). PCR Purification and Plasmid
Extraction Kits were purchased from Bioneer (UK). Phenyl-
methylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), DpnI
(Thermo Scientific, USA) with other chemicals and reagents were
commercially available as the highest reagent grade.
2.2. Preparation of brazzein mutants by site-directed mutagenesis
In this study, minor form of Brz (GenBank: KF013250.1) with 53-
amino acid containing Met residue in N-terminus was cloned in
pET28a vector (Fig. 1).
The primers required for inducing themutations are provided inNumber of molecules ¼ ðGram Sucrose=gram proteinÞ*ðmolecularTable 1. Site directed mutagenesis was performed through Quick-
change method using Pfu premix Kit (Bioneer, Korea). Before the
transformation and in order of digesting non-mutated template
plasmids, the PCR products were treated with 15 U DpnI at 37 C for
18 h and purified by clean up kit to remove the digested fragments
and primers. A value of 2 ml of the purified products was then used
to transform the competent cells (Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3)) using
calcium chloride procedure [22]. Finally, WT and mutated plasmids
of Brz (pET-28a) were sequenced using an automated sequencer
(Bioneer, Korean).
2.3. Expression and purification of WT and mutant protein
A single colony of E. coli strain SHuffle® T7 Express containing
plasmid pET-28a(þ) was firstly selected and grown overnight at
30 C in 5 ml of Luria broth (LB) medium supplemented with 50 mg
kanamycin/ml and continually was shaken at 180 rpm. Afterwards,
200 mL of the mixture was injected into 200 ml Trypton Broth (TB)
medium, containing 50 mg kanamycin/ml, and then incubated at
30 C until an A600 nm of approximately 0.8e1.0 was attained. Cells
were subsequently induced for 2 h by addition of IPTG (Isopropyl-b-
D-thiogalactopyranosid) at a final concentration of 0.5 mM. The
culture was then centrifuged at 12000 g for 20 min at 4 C and
deposited product were added to lysis buffer, 0.5 mM PMSF and
4 mM DTT. The purification process was performed on Ni-NAT spin
column (QIAGEN Co.) Finally, protein analysis was performed by
16% Tris-Tricine gel. Protein concentration was determined ac-
cording to Bradford method [23]. The data were averaged of three
independent experiments.
2.4. Cleavage of the fusion protein and purification of brazzein
The pH of the sample was adjusted slowly to 1.5e1.7 by adding
1 M HCl. Thirty to fifty mg CNBr was added into 8 ml of elution
buffer containing protein at 0.2 mg/ml concentration. In order to
remove amino terminus, the solution was incubated under dark
condition (18 h) at room temperature [24,25]. Ni-NTA column was
used to separate cleavage, CNBretreated proteins from uncleavage
ones. Condensation, desalting and buffer exchange of the protein
were done by Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal column (Millipore, USA)
and samples were used for further studies.
2.5. Taste test
The tests for the solutions of WT and mutants were carried out
according to Lee et al. procedure [26]. Distilled water (DW) and 1%
sucrose solution were used for comparison. For conducting the test
11 individuals including five men and six women aging 20e39 and
with good health and normal sense were selected for tasting. As
depicted in Table 2, 200 mL of samples with desirable concentra-
tions ranging from 1 to 10 mg/ml including 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 mg/ml
were delivered to apex of tongue by pipet [26]. After every test the
mouth was washed by a cup of tap water and its sweetness was
reported in scale of basic weight in comparison with sweetness of
Sucrose. For comparison of sweetness power of a protein with Su-
crose, the lowest quantity of Sucrose essential for sensing the
sweetness (1 g/ml) is divided by the lowest quantity of protein for
similar sensing. The resulting parameter is reported as g/g. It can be
converted to the minimum number of protein molecules for
sweetness sensing using the following relationship:mass of protein=molecular mass of SucroseÞ
Fig. 1. Insertion of the gene responsible for coding of the minor form of brazzein in pET 28a (A) Unique sites are shown on the circle map in pET 28a (B) protein sequence of minor
form of brazzein, His-Tag, cleavage CNBr site and position A19.
Table 1
Selective residues for substitution by site-directed mutagenesis and modified brazzein residues; Changed base are shown by bold and underline.
Position Residue substitution Primer sequence Residue character
Before After Before After
Ala 19 Gly tccaaatgtcagctgggcaaccagtgcaactac Uncharged Uncharged
Asp caaatgccagcttgacaaccagtacaactac Negative
lys gtccaaatgccagctgaaaaaccagtgcaactacg Positive
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e2822The samples were used in order of increasing their concentra-
tion and the first sample in which each participant could detect its
sweetness was considered as threshold of sensing. However, for
preventing of any experimental bias, all participants in experiments
as well as experiment conductors were not aware of the type of
protein (WT or mutants) and the activity of protein variants were
assayed using double-blind procedure. Each experiment was
repeated three times in different days by the same participants. The
resulting data were averaged and corresponding standard de-
viations were calculated. Differences among group means and their
variationswere evaluated by considering probability P 0.05 as the
level of significance and performing analysis of variance (ANOVA)
accompanied by pairwise comparisons of the scores of each group
using Fisher's least significance difference (LSD) method.
2.6. Bioinformatics
Structural models of mutants as well as sweet taste receptor,
T1R2/T1R3, were made with the MODELLER program Ver. 9.15 [27]
and using the structure of WT protein (Pdb code: 2LY5) as template
for mutants of Brz [4]. The Crystal structure of the extracellular
region of the group II metabotropic glutamate receptor (pdb code:Table 2
The comparison between the sweetness intensity of WT protein brazzein and its mutan
Sweet tasting molecule Molecular mass (Da) Experim
g 100 m
Sucrose 342.30 1
WT 6370.19 0.0004
A19K 6427.29 0.0001
A19G 6356.16 0.0004
A19D 6414.20 0.0012E4U) was also used as template for construction of sweet taste
receptor [28]. The quality of structural models for each mutant was
evaluated with the SVAES (The Structure Analysis and Verification
Server) server [29e32] as well as the ModEval program at SaliLab
Model Evaluation Server (https://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/
evaluation//) [33e35] and the best structures were selected based
on the scores of ERRAT and Verify 3D programs under the SAVES
server and DOPE (Discrete Optimized Protein Energy) score of the
ModEval program.
Accessible surface area of WT-Brz and its mutants was deter-
mined by VADAR (Volume, Area, and Dihydral Angle Reporter)
server [36]. Examining the interactions of the structure of protein
variants were performed by Protein Interaction Calculate (PIC)
server using the pdb files of proteins as input [37].
To understand the molecular mechanism responsible for the
recognition of binding residues, docking simulations were run us-
ing HADDOCK program (Ver. 2.2) [38]. The calculations on the
protein side were guided by defining active residues based on the
previous reports [16,39,40]. In order to find the possible external
binding sites, the preferred models of HADDOCK were compared
with previously reports and it was found that in the most of the
complexes, the docking were done with the central region on the
cavity between the T1R2-T1R3 receptor. Different predictedts with sucrose.
ental taste threshold Sweetness in comparison to
sucrose
l 1 mM g/g Molecule
29000 1 1
0.6279 2510 46711.81
0.1555 10025 188237.16
0.629 2510 46711.81
1.559 985 18457.45
Fig. 2. Ribbon diagram of Brazzein in Crystal state (A) and solution state (B) deter-
mined by X-Ray Crystallography (PDB code: 4HE7) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(PDB code: 2LY5), respectively. The site of mutation is shown by white arrow. (The
structure is depicted by Chimera software).
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28 23binding sites were energetically evaluated and the best one for each
protein variant was selected and further analyzed.
2.7. Circular dichroism measurements
Circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the WT and mutants were
recorded with an Aviv 215 circular dichroism spectrometer using a
1-mm path-length quartz cell and at 25 C. Far-UV CD spectra were
obtained at a protein concentration of 0.2 mg/ml at wavelengths
from 190 to 250 nm. The measurements are expressed as mean
residue ellipticity with amean residueweight (MRW) of 118 for Brz.
The data were recorded three to four times and averaged.
2.8. Isothermal urea-induced denaturation
For stability measurements, stock solution of urea (10 M) was
made in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.6. For each unfolding experiment a fixed
volume of protein stock solution (50 mg/ml) and 10 ml Dithiothritole
(DDT) was mixed with the appropriate volumes of buffer solution
as well as fresh urea stock solution and were incubated for
approximately 7 h at room temperature. Fluorescence measure-
ments were performed with a Varian luminescence spectropho-
tometer. Intrinsic fluorescence was determined at excitation
wavelength of 280 nm. Emission spectra were recorded within
300e450 nm at the scan rate of 100 nm per minute. Both of the
excitation and emission slits were set to 5 nm.
2.9. Analysis of isothermal urea-induced denaturation curves
It was shown that the free energy of chemical unfolding reaction
in small proteins in the presence of urea, DG ([urea]) is linearly
related to the concentration of denaturants as equation (1) [41]:
DGð½ureaÞ ¼ DGðH2OÞ mð½ureaÞ (1)
where, DG(H2O) is the free energy change of unfolding reaction
extrapolated to zero concentration of urea and m is the slope of DG
versus [urea]. m-value is a constant which is proportional to in-
crease in the solvent accessible surface area upon unfolding of
protein.
Hence, the free energy of unfolding in the absence of Urea,
DG(H2O) is calculated using equation (2):
DGðH2OÞ ¼ mð½ureaÞ50% (2)
[Urea]50% is the concentration of urea in which half of the protein is
denatured.
Isothermal urea-induced denaturation data were analyzed for
obtaining thermodynamic parameters of equations (1) and (2). The
observed signal of characteristic maximum fluorescence emission
was plotted as a function of Urea concentration. The resulting
sigmoid-like curves known as urea denaturation curves deter-
mined at temperature T were first normalized between 0 and 1 and
expressed as the plots of the fraction of protein in the unfolded
state (fu) versus [Urea]. The plots of (fu) versus [Urea] were fitted to
equation (3), assuming a two-state (Folded-Unfolded) model with
Kaliedagraph analysis software.
Fu ¼

exp
ðDGH2Oþm½Urea Þ
RT


1þ expðDGH2Oþm½Urea ÞRT
 (3)
where; FU is the measured fluorescence intensity as a function of
urea concentration normalized between 0 and 1, R is the gas con-
stant and T is the temperature in Kelvin, is the free energy change ofunfolding reaction extrapolated to zero concentration of urea and
m is the slope of DG versus [urea].
According to equation (2) and using DGH2O and m-value ob-
tained from equation (3), [Urea]50% can also be calculated [42,43].3. Results
3.1. Description of mutation
Fig. 2 shows the structure of WT-Brz in solution state (pdb code:
2LY5) and crystal form (pdb code: 4HE7). The main difference of
two structures is due to the presence of a loop in solution structure
as connector of the first beta strand with an alpha helix. In crystal
form, however; presence of a short length sequence (Q17-L18-A19-
N20) in loop conformer results in breaking the helix into two
fragments. The position of mutation is shown by arrow.
For determining the accessible surface area of residues in Brz we
used VADAR program and aforementioned structures as input for
program. The output of VADAR calculation regarding the side
chains of residues in both solution and crystal structures are shown
in Fig. 3. It can be seen that Ala19 with a hydrophobic side chain is
exposed to polar environment. According to hydropathy score table
of Kyte-Doolittle [19] it seems that the presence of Ala with hy-
dropathy score of þ1.8 is thermodynamically unfavorable. Hence;
this residue was selected as the site of mutation.
Structural examination of the solution state structure of Brz
(pdb code:2LY5) with PIC server shows that side chain of Ala19
interacts with the main chains of Asn23 and Glu36. More Exact
structural examination by conversion of pdb files to DSSP file
format indicate that Ala19 is involved in helix and turn conformers
in solution and crystal structures, respectively.
In the first mutation named A19K, Ala19 was replaced by Lys
which has hydropathy score of 3.9. In the second one named
A19D, Ala19 was replaced by Asp with hydropathy score of 3.5. In
other mutant Ala19 was substituted by Gly with more conforma-
tional space and hydropathy score of 0.4.
Fig. 3. Accessible Surface Area of the side chains of Brazzein residues in solution state structure (dotted line) and crystal structure (continuous line). The pdb files of protein in
solution and crystal states (PDB code: 2LY5 and 4HE7, respectively) was used as input for calculation the ASA in VADAR.
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28243.2. Docking
Fig. 4, A shows the representative model of the complexed form
of Brz with Sweet taste receptor subunits indicating that Brz has
been optimally fitted in the cavity of the T1R2-T1R3 heterodimer
containing residues of both subunits. Proximal residues from the
subunits at the contact interface are also shown in Fig. 4, B.
In order to compare the complexed forms of Brz and its mutants
and for determining the structure-function relationship, all inter-
acting residues in contact surface for WT brazzein and its mutants
are shown in Fig. 5.
3.3. Expression and purification of the WT and mutant proteins
In heterologous expression in E. coli strain SHuffle® T7 Express,
approximately 7.2e8.4 mg/L of WT and mutant forms of Brz was
obtained. We evaluated the purity of expressed proteins by Tris-
Tricine gel SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. Fig. 6 shows the results of
Tris-Tricine gel electrophoresis which reveal soluble proteinFig. 4. Representation of the interaction of WT brazzeinwith the subunits of the hetero-dim
(A) space-filling model, with the T1R2 protomer colored in blue and the T1R2 in green an
brazzein with regions of T1R2 and T1R3 showing the critical residues at the interacting suvariants at high level of purity. This level of purity is essential for
Sweetness Assessment and spectroscopic studies.3.4. Sweetness Assessment
The results of taste panel test for WT protein and its mutants are
shown in Fig. 7.
Sweetness power of WT protein and its mutants was also
compared with sucrose and the results are provided in Table 2.
According to data of Fig. 7 it was revealed that the substitution
of alanine 19 with glycine could not alter the sweetness potency of
Brz; while, A19G variant has the same activity as WT protein.
However, introduction of a positive charge in A19Kmutant led to 4-
fold increase in Brz's sweetness. On the other hand, substitution of
alanine with negative-charged residue in A19D mutant results in
decreasing the activity of protein and reduction of its sweetness
power. The resulting data of Table 2 are also in good agreement
with those provided in Fig. 7.eric human sweet receptor. HADDOCK programwas used for construction of complexes.
d brazzein in red. (B) Close-up view as ribbon scheme and details of binding sites of
rface.
Fig. 5. Regions of predicted complexes of the modeled structure of T1R2-T1R3 sweet receptor with brazzein and its mutants containing the interacting residues at the binding
surface of the receptor cavity. Residues of the T1R2, T1R3 and brazzein are shown in blue, green and red respectively. The selected models were evaluated by PIC server for
determining different types of interactions at the binding surface. The Hydrophobic, Ionic, Aromatic-Sulphur and Cation-Pi interactions were calculated within 5, 6, 5.3 and 6 Å,
respectively. While Aromatic-Aromatic interactions were calculated within 4.5 and 7 Å.
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28 253.5. Circular dichroism measurement
We used far UV CD measurement for monitoring the changes in
the secondary structure of protein upon mutation. The far UV CD
spectra (Fig. 8) have a characteristic shape of beta-sheet structure
with different magnitudes for WT protein and mutants.
According to far UV CD spectra of Fig. 8, hypochromacity of CD
band with a slight red shift in the position of the negative band was
observed for A19D and A19K mutants. The hypochromacity of CD
band in A19D and A19K relative to WT and A19G mutant is origi-
nated from the more flexibility of peptide bonds. This is because
that peptide bonds act as chromophores in far UV-CD region. On
the other hand, beta sheets in proteins have a wide range of
extended geometries and flexibility. The variation in beta sheets
can occur in length and width as well as twisting angle and in
globular protein they may deviate from the planar structure [44].Fig. 6. Tris-Tricine gel analysis of protein variants after purification with affinity Ni-
NTA column chromatography.Hence, resulting CD data spectra indicates that presence of Gly
with more conformational space (local flexibility) could help the
beta strands for better orientation and obtaining appropriate ge-
ometry for creation of optimized intra-strand hydrogen bonds
essential for formation of beta sheet structure toward global sta-
bilization of protein. In other words, although the physico-chemical
properties of Gly may results in local instability as a result of more
local flexibility, however, the global stability of Brz increases in
A19G mutant because of optimizing the geometries of beta strands
and intra-strands hydrogen bonds.
The small red shift in CD band in A19D and A19Kmutants can be
attributed to the more favorable interaction of dipole moment of
Asp and Lys with polar solvent molecules.Fig. 7. The results of taste panel for WT mutants. The results are gathered from 11
people and are reported with corresponding errors. The black color and hatched col-
umns refers to WT and mutant proteins, respectively. DW refers to distilled water.
Fig. 8. Far UV CD spectra of WT brazzein and its mutants. Far-UV CD spectra were
recorded at a protein concentration of 0.2 mg/ml in the wavelengths ranging from 190
to 250 nm. The spectra were analyzed by Jasco program and are expressed as mean
residue ellipticity.
Fig. 9. Normalized equilibrium denaturation curves of the WT Brazzein and its mu-
tants monitored by lmax of fluorescence intensity. the experimental data were fitted to
equation (3) by kaliedagraph analysis software.
Table 3
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28263.6. Isothermal urea induced unfolding
In equilibrium unfolding studies, we assumed a two state
unfolding mechanism for Brz. In this assumption both native (N)
and unfolded (D) conformations are present at measurable con-
centrations and there is no stable intermediate in equilibrium [45].
It is noticeable that upon chemical unfolding at different concen-
trations of urea, the fluorescence spectroscopy was used for
monitoring the changes in the tertiary structure of protein around
chromophores which are involved in fluorescence emission. Brz
contains no tryptophan (Trp) residue. However, it has 6 tyrosines
(Tyr) at positions 8, 11, 24, 39, 51 and 54. It has also a single Phenyl-
alanine (Phe) residue (Phe38) near Tyr39. Hence, the fluorescence
emission of Brz is originated mainly from Tyr residues and our
interpretation of the conformational stability is related to these
locations of protein. Fig. 9 shows the equilibrium denaturation
curves of WT and mutants as the lmax of fluorescence emission
against the denaturant concentrations. The continuous lines for
each scatter-plot are the best fit of experimental data to equation
(3).
Thermodynamic parameters of isothermal denaturation exper-
iments obtained from the analysis of data in Fig. 9 are given in
Table 3.
According to equilibrium unfolding data in Table 3; the confor-
mational stability of WT-Brz against urea denaturation in the
absence of disulfide bonds is only 1.97 kcal/mol. The m-value has
been shown to be proportional to the difference in the solvent
accessible surface area (SASA) between the denatured and folded
states of protein. Comparison of [urea]50% and thermodynamic m-
values in Table 3 suggests that more stability of A19G is more
related to [urea]50%; while, higher magnitude of m-value in A19D as
destabilized variant is originated from its higher SASA in denatured
state rather than its compactness in the folded state.Thermodynamic parameters for WT brazzein and mutants obtained by analysis of
equilibrium denaturation curves of Fig. 9 using equation (3).
Protein variants aDG(H2O)b am-valueb [Urea]50%b
WT 1.97 ± 0.09 0.52 ± 0.02 3.79 ± 0.22
A19D 1.73 ± 0.07 0.60 ± 0.03 2.88 ± 0.18
A19K 1.51 ± 0.05 0.52 ± 0.02 2.90 ± 0.15
A19G 2.03 ± 0.09 0.44 ± 0.03 4.61 ± 0.37
In quantitative analysis of urea denaturation curves by fitting of experimental data
to equations (1)e(3). The free energy change of protein in unfolding reaction at
different concentration of urea is theoretically extrapolated to the zero concentra-
tion of urea by fitting experimental data to equation (3) and reported as DG (H2O).
a Standard Deviations (SDs) are calculated based on three or four replicates of
experiments.
b m-value in kcal.mol2; [Urea]50% in M and DG(H2O) in kcal.mol1.4. Discussion
Dssp file contents of the solution structure of Brz (pdb code:
2LY5) indicate that a fragment of protein ranging fromAla19 to Lys30
is the only helix conformation in the structure of Brz. Furthermore,
Ala19 is located at the starting point of this helix between hydro-
phobic Leu and polar Asn residues. According to the bioinformatic
studies and modelling results we found that non-polar Ala19 is
located at the surface of protein near polar environment which
apparently is in contrast with physico-chemical principles. So, we
assumed that replacement of Ala19 with more hydrophilic residuesmay influence both conformational stability of Brz as well as its
interaction with receptors.
According to the results of theoretical and far UV-CD studies on
WT and mutants, it seems that Asp and Lys residues in A19D and
A19K variants are directly involved in hydrogen bonds with other
residues as well as polar water molecules. However, these in-
teractions lead to distortion of beta strands and decreasing the
stability of beta sheets or overall conformational stability of protein.
In contrast, high degree of local flexibility in A19G mutant is
accompanied by increased overall conformational stability of pro-
tein. these findings with Taste test results together indicates that
local flexibility and positive charge at the surface of protein are
more important factors influencing the interaction of protein with
the G-protein coupled human sweet receptor.
According to docking results, the side of protein containing
position 19 is toward interacting surface of receptor for all pro-
tein variants (Figs. 4 and 5). This is in good agreement with the
report of Singarapu et al. [20] in which they considered the re-
gion of protein containing position 19 as one of the critical points
for interaction with the receptor. Hence, it seems that any change
P. Ghanavatian et al. / Biochimie 131 (2016) 20e28 27in this position may alter the stability of the corresponding
complex.
Comparison of the complexed forms of WT Brz and its mutants
(Fig. 5) indicate that increasing of sweet taste in A19K mutant is
associated with significant change in the number and pattern of
weak interactions at the binding surface. Structural examination
of modeled complex of E19K-receprore indicates that positive side
chain of Lys19 in A19K mutants has 13.43 and 13.35 Å distance
from negative side chains of Glu252 and Glu253, respectively. It
seems that the presence of negatively electrostatic patch including
Glu252-Glu253 in T1R2 subunit results in creation of a long-range
electrostatic interaction with positive side chain of Lys at posi-
tion 19 of A19K mutant which in turn elicit to slight chain
mobility of protein at the binding surface and changing the
pattern of interactions toward more effective binding. Structural
data of Fig. 5 shows that among 14 different types of weak in-
teractions, WT Brz has only one ionic interaction including Lys15-
Asp520-T1R3 and upon replacement of Ala with Lys in A19K
mutant Glu253 and His50 of T1R2 can also form ionic interactions
with corresponding residues in A19K (Lys15-Asp520-T1R3, Lys15-
Glu253-T1R2 and Asp25- His50-T1R2). This finding indicates that
Lys at position 19 is indirectly involved in binding process. It was
also found that some of the binding interactions including Lys15-
Tyr519-T1R3, Tyr24-Gln255-T1R2, Tyr39-Trp487-T1R3, Tyr39- His488-
T1R3 as well as Arg43- His488-T1R3 are removed and new ones are
formed with Val13, Ser14, Glu17, Leu18, Asp25 and Leu45 in A19k
mutants which finally results in increasing the number of in-
teractions to 19. This leads to enhancement of binding strengths of
E9K variant with sweet receptor and especially T1R2 subunit.
Similar examination of interactions in A19G and A19D variants
indicates that the number of weak interactions in A19G and A19D
mutants is 13 and 12, respectively. These data together indicate
that sweetness of protein can be changed by altering the number
and pattern of interactions at binding surface. According to the
results of isothermal denaturation experiments, it appears that
interaction of A19D and A19K variants with urea molecules is
more favorable than A19G and WT. This is because that urea
molecule can interact with protein by forming hydrogen bonds
with surfaced exposed residues of protein and/or by exchanging
hydrogen bonds with intra-molecular hydrogen bonds. Hence, the
ability of Asp and Lys to form hydrogen bond with water mole-
cules in the absence of urea and replacing these bonds with urea
molecules in denaturing conditions can help protein to denature
more favorably relative to WT and A19G mutant. By following the
same reasoning, it may be concluded that the absence of side
chain in Gly results in more stability of A19G mutants against urea
denaturation. Considering previously reports on high degree of
thermal stability of Brz and its low chemical stability; we reported
in this study, it may be said that the presence of disulfide bonds
has profound effect on the structural integrity of Brz. In summary,
antithetical effect of A19D and A19K mutants on the activity of
protein and similar activity observed for WT and A19G variant
indicate that the presence of charged residue at this position may
have profound effect on the interaction of protein with corre-
sponding receptor. It was also concluded that positive charge at
this position can increases the strength of interaction toward
increasing the sweetness power of protein; while, negative charge
decreases the activity of protein.
Our data are in good agreement with previously reports con-
cerning the importance of positive charge on the activity and
sweetness of protein in regions of protein other than that we
investigated in this study. Accordingly; it can be concluded that
Ala19 can be considered as a critical region for investigating the
relationship between structure and activity of Brz.Acknowledgments
Financial support of this work was provided by Iran National
Science Foundation (Fund Number: 90007290). We would also like
to thank the Research Council of the University of Zanjan. We also
appreciate technical support from Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics (IBB) of the university of Tehran and Institute for
Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences of Zanjan for Circular Dichroism
and fluorescence measurements, respectively. The authors have
declared no conflict of interest.