The Gelsolin Pathogenic D187N Mutant Exhibits Altered
Conformational Stability and Forms Amyloidogenic Oligomers
Ankit Srivastava,† Jasdeep Singh,† Shiv Pratap Singh Yadav,‡ Prabha Arya,†,§ Fouzia Kalim,† Pooja Rose,†
Ashish,*,‡ and Bishwajit Kundu*,†
†Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, IIT Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India
‡CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh 160036, India
*S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Gelsolin is an actin-severing protein that attains
an open functional conformation in the presence of Ca2+ or
low pH. Mutations (D187N/Y) in the second domain of
gelsolin trigger the proteolytic pathway producing amyloido-
genic fragments that form the pathological hallmark of gelsolin
amyloidosis and lattice corneal dystrophy type 2 (LCD2).
Here, we show that the D187N mutant gelsolin in a Ca2+
depleted, low pH-activated, open conformation could assemble
into amyloidogenic oligomers without necessarily undergoing the specific proteolytic step. Although both wild-type (WT) and
mutant proteins exhibit closely overlapping globular shapes at physiological conditions, the latter exhibits subjugated actin
depolymerization, loss of thermodynamic stability, and folding cooperativity. Mutant gelsolin displayed aberrant conformational
unwinding and formed structural conformers with high associative properties at low pH conditions. A SAXS intensity profile and
Guinier analysis of these conformers showed the formation of unusual, higher order aggregates. Extended incubation at low pH
resulted in the formation of thioflavin T and Congo red positive, β-sheet rich aggregates with a fibrillar, amyloid-like morphology
visible under electron and atomic force microscopy. Mass spectrometric analysis of disaggregated end-stage fibrils displayed
peptide fragments encompassing the entire protein sequence, indicating the involvement of full length mutant gelsolin in fibril
formation. Atomistic and REMD simulations indicated a larger increase in solvent accessibility and loss of fold architecture in
mutant gelsolin at low pH as compared to WT gelsolin. Our findings support the existence of a secondary oligomerization-
dependent aggregation pathway associated with gelsolin amyloidosis and can pave the way for better therapeutic strategies.
Amyloidogenesis involves the conformational conversion ofnative proteins or peptides into misfolded, higher order
amyloid aggregates having distinct β-sheet architecture.1−3
These aggregates along with their prefibrillar and oligomeric
species collectively contribute to cellular toxicity and tissue
impairment and aid in disease manifestation.4 Gelsolin
amyloidosis or AGel amyloidosis represents a similar case,
where mutant gelsolin undergoes proteolytic cleavage produc-
ing amyloidogenic fragments that aggregate and contribute to
disease etiology.5 Two mutant forms of gelsolin (G654A or
G654T) have been found associated with familial amyloidosis
and Meretoja’s syndrome or lattice corneal dystrophy type 2
(LCD2).6 These mutations in the gelsolin gene lead to a
substitution of Asp187 with either Asn (Finnish-type) or Tyr
(Danish-type), respectively7 (Figure 1). Besides, two other
mutations in gelsolin, viz., Asn184 to Lys (C633 to A) and
Gly167 to Arg (G580 to A), associated with renal amyloidosis
are also reported.8,9
Gelsolin is a hexa-domain (named G1−G6), actin-severing,
nucleating, capping protein that exists as cytosolic and secreted
plasma isoforms in most vertebrates, including in humans.10
The protein exhibits a compact globular structure under Ca2+-
free conditions at physiological pH. It undergoes a conforma-
tional change and attains an extended, functionally active form
in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+ or low pH (pH ≤5).11 This dual
activation mechanism of gelsolin is reportedly required during
physiological (Ca2+-regulated) as well as stressed (low pH-
regulated) conditions.12 A mutation in its second domain (G2)
alters its calcium binding capacity, resulting in an aberrant
conformation that makes it susceptible to proteolytic cleavage
(Figure 1). Previous reports have shown that calcium binding
plays an important role in imparting overall structural stability
to gelsolin.13,14 In fact, the isolated G2 domain under calcium-
free conditions folds into a non-native conformation.15
Additionally, urea denaturation studies have also shown that
the D187N variant is slightly destabilized compared to wild-
type (WT) gelsolin.16 However, a detailed biophysical study
emphasizing the implications of the destabilized G2 domain
harboring a D187N mutation under Ca2+-free conditions is not
yet available.
Besides, several other studies have also shown that gelsolin
amyloidosis incurs high endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and
compromises cellular functions.17,18 Evidently, amyloid-associ-
ated ER stress in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and kidney
Received: January 12, 2018
Revised: March 15, 2018
Published: March 30, 2018
Article
pubs.acs.org/biochemistryCite This: Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
© XXXX American Chemical Society A DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
amyloidosis also induce lactic acidosis, hypokalemic acidosis,
and tubular acidosis that could facilitate the release of metal
ions from metal binding proteins like gelsolin.19−22 In the
context of gelsolin amyloidosis, cellular acidosis could create an
intriguing combination of misfolded, yet partially active,
conformations of gelsolin protein. Interestingly, a recent report
by Bannykh and co-workers showed the presence of distinct
amyloid fibers inside the ER of mice expressing a mutant
(D187N) form of gelsolin.23 A similar alteration in the
processing of β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) with an
increase in brain lactate production in AD has also been
reported.24 This led us to hypothesize that during progressive
phases of gelsolin amyloidosis, loss in calcium regulation could
drive acidosis-like conditions, thereby propelling mutant
gelsolin to attain an open and partially active conformation.
To reliably understand the biophysical implications of this
scenario, we studied the open conformation of WT and D187N
mutant gelsolin under low pH conditions using a battery of
spectral and ultrastructural probes. Our results provide insights
into how the D187N mutation reduces structural integrity in
gelsolin, thereby populating an amyloidogenic precursor state
that oligomerizes into amyloid-like aggregates under low pH
conditions.
■ MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of Proteins. A pRSET-A plasmid incorporat-
ing the human plasma gelsolin gene cloned between the BamHI
and HindIII restriction sites was used. The protein was
expressed and purified using anion exchange followed by gel
filtration chromatography as described elsewhere.12 The
purified protein incorporates an N-terminal His-tag and a few
pRSET-A vector-associated extra amino acids. Since the extra
amino acids have no discernible effect on the structure/activity
and actin-depolymerization property of gelsolin, all of the
experiments were performed using His-tagged protein. The
mutant gelsolin (G654A) was created by site-directed muta-
genesis employing a protocol from the Quikchange site-
directed mutagenesis kit from Stratagene (Agilent Technolo-
gies, USA). A single point mutation in gelsolin (WT) at
position 187 (D187N) by replacing the aspartic acid residue
with an asparagine using partially overlapping primers was
done. The following primers were utilized with the newly
introduced base underlined: 5′-G GAG AGC TTC AAC AAT
GGC AAC TGC TTC ATC CTG GAC CTG-3′ and 5′-CAG
GTC CAG GAT GAA GCA GTT GCC ATT GTT GAA GCT
CTC C-3′. The mutation was verified by sequencing at
Chromous Biotech, India. After mutation confirmation and a
protein expression check, the D187N variant was purified using
a similar protocol as described above. The concentrations of
GFC purified proteins was measured using UV absorption at
A280 ∼ 1.4, corresponding to 1 mg mL−1 (DU-640
spectrophotometer, Beckman). To confirm the molecular
weight and monodispersity of both gelsolin variants, 100 μL
of each protein sample (1 mg mL−1) was loaded onto a
precalibrated superdex 200, 10/300 SEC column attached to an
AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare, USA) operated at 25
°C. Further, molecular masses of the proteins were also
confirmed by mass spectrometry.
Fluorescence and Circular Dichroism (CD). Tryptophan
fluorescence spectra were measured using a 10 mm path length
quartz cuvette in an LS 55 spectrofluorimeter (PerkinElmer,
MA, USA) at 25 °C. The excitation wavelength was fixed at 295
nm, and the spectra were recorded between 310 and 400 nm.
For all experiments, protein concentrations were kept constant
at 3.6 μM. For far-UV CD measurements, all protein samples
were scanned (250−200 nm) in a 1 mm path length cell at 25
°C using a J810 spectropolarimeter (JASCO). The mean
residual ellipticity [θ] in each case was calculated using eq 1:
θ
θ
=
×
lc
[ ]
MRW
10
obs
(1)
Here, θobs is the observed ellipticity in millidegrees (mdeg), and
MRW (mean residue weight) represents M/(N − 1) (M is
molecular weight and N is number of residues). The variable c
is the concentration in mg mL−1, and l is the path length in cm.
Thermal Denaturation Assay. For thermal denaturation
experiments, change in ellipticity [θ210] was monitored against
temperature with a ramping rate of 1 °C/min. All data were
recorded in triplicate, and the averaged spectra was normalized,
fitted using the Origin 8.0 software, and reported.
Equilibrium Unfolding/Refolding Experiments. All
equilibrium unfolding/refolding experiments were carried out
using 8 and 10 M stocks of ultrapure GdnCl and urea,
respectively. For unfolding studies, protein samples were
prepared in Tris buffer (25 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7)
containing varying concentrations of denaturant (GdnCl or
urea), followed by equilibration for 12 h at 25 °C. Similarly, for
refolding studies, protein stocks (50 μM) unfolded in 6 M
GdnCl/urea for 24 h were stepwise diluted in Tris buffer and
further left for a 12 h equilibration at 25 °C. A final protein
concentration of 2.5 μM was kept constant for all unfolding/
refolding experiments. Fluorescence scans of each sample taken
in a 1 cm cuvette were recorded between 310 and 400 nm, after
excitation at 295 nm, in an LS 55 spectrofluorimeter
(PerkinElmer, USA). The excitation and emission slits were
fixed at 5 nm each. The ratio of fluorescence emission at 360
and 332 nm (334 nm for D187N) was calculated and plotted
against increasing concentration of GdnCl or urea. Finally, the
data were analyzed assuming the free energy of unfolding or
refolding (G0D) to be linearly dependent on the denaturant
concentration. G0D was obtained by linear extrapolation of the
Figure 1. Gelsolin multidomain architecture. Structure of gelsolin
monomer (PDB entry 3FFN) depicting all six domains (G1−G6) in
different colors. The zoomed view of the second (G2) domain
(turquoise) shows the position of aspartic acid (D187) in WT protein
and the point mutation incorporating an asparagine residue (N187) in
the mutated (D187N) protein. A loss in Ca2+ binding (red sphere)
due to D187N mutation is also shown. The structures were visualized
using UCSF Chimera.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
B
plot of free energy change and denaturant concentration to 0
M. The pattern of unfolding and refolding of each gelsolin
variant was analyzed and approximated in a two-state unfolding
model described by the following reaction (eq 2):
↔N U
Ku (2)
Here, N and U are the molar concentrations of native and
unfolded proteins, respectively, and Ku is the unfolding rate
constant. The data of denaturant-induced transition curves
were analyzed using a nonlinear least-squares method for
obtaining free energy change of unfolding in the absence of any
denaturant (G0D), the midpoint concentration of denaturant
required for unfolding or refolding (Cm), and the slope (m) of
the unfolding or refolding curve at Cm using the following eqs
3−6, as described previously:25
= − −K y y y y[( ) ( )]/[( ) ( ) ]u N U (3)
Δ = −G G m[D]D
0
D (4)
= −ΔK e m G RTu
( [D] / )0D (5)
= − ΔC G m( / )m (H O)2 (6)
Here, (y)N and (y)U are optical properties of the native and
denatured protein molecules, respectively. R is the universal gas
constant, and T is the temperature in kelvin; ΔGD is the change
in free energy at a particular denaturant concentration [D].
Amyloid Aggregation Experiments. Both purified
proteins (WT and D187N gelsolin) were incubated at a
concentration of 2−10 μM in different pH buffer solutions (pH
2−10) with a 0.02% (v/v) final concentration of sodium azide.
All samples (250 μL) were incubated in 1.5 mL eppendorfs at
37 °C under continuous agitation at 200 rpm and monitored by
dye binding assays.
Dye Binding Assays. For the ThT assay, samples (10 μL)
aliquoted at different time points were mixed with 10 μM ThT
(90 μL) prepared in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7) and
incubated for 10 min. Following this, fluorescence readings
(λexcitation = 450 nm, λemission = 485 nm) were recorded in a 1 cm
path length cuvette using an LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer
(PerkinElmer, MA, USA), while the excitation and emission
slits were kept at 5 and 10 nm, respectively. Data from triplicate
reactions were averaged and fitted using sigmoid eq 7 in Origin
8.0, as described earlier.26
= + +
+
+
τ
− −
Y Y m x
Y m x
( )
1 exp x t
i i
f f
( )50
(7)
Here, Y is the ThT fluorescence intensity (a.u.). τ is the time
constant. x is the time in hours, and t50 is the time at which
ThT fluorescence attained 50% of the maximum intensity
(Imax). The lag time of aggregation (Tlag) was calculated using
eq 8.
τ= −T t 2lag 50 (8)
For the Congo red (CR) binding assay, the aggregates were
incubated with 600 μL of CR solution (9.2 mM in PBS) at
room temperature for 4 h in the dark. The absorption spectra
between 400 and 600 nm were recorded using a DU-640
spectrophotometer (Beckman), with subtraction of the baseline
spectrum of the buffer. The absorbance spectrum of each
sample was also corrected for light scattering by subtracting the
spectra of aggregates alone in the buffer scanned in the visible
region. The final spectrum obtained for each sample was
compared with CR-only spectra to ascertain the characteristic
amyloid-bound red-shift.
For the surface hydrophobicity assessment, 1-anilinonaph-
thalene 8-sulfonate (ANS) binding experiments were per-
formed. After we added the ANS dye to different protein
samples at a final concentration of 50 μM, the samples were
incubated for 5 min at 25 °C. Following this, fluorescence scans
in the range of 400−600 nm (λexcitation = 370 nm) were
recorded in a 1 cm path length cuvette using an LS 55
fluorescence spectrometer (PerkinElmer, MA, USA), while the
excitation and emission slits were kept at 5 nm each.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Transmission
electron micrographs of aggregating samples were recorded
using a Tecnai transmission electron microscope (FEI, USA)
operated at 120 kV. The aggregates obtained after a 1 week
incubation were 5-fold diluted and placed on a copper grid for
2 min. Following this, samples were negatively stained using a
2% (w/v) uranyl acetate solution, washed with Milli-Q water,
air-dried, and imaged.
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). AFM imaging of
aggregate samples was done using a Bioscope Catalyst AFM
(Bruker Corporation, Billerica, MA). The end-stage morphol-
ogy of gelsolin aggregates formed after a 1 week incubation was
examined. Each sample was diluted 3-fold in 50 mM phosphate
buffer (pH 7.0) and deposited on freshly cleaved mica.
Following a 30 min incubation, the samples were washed
using Milli-Q water and dried overnight. Samples were analyzed
using standard tapping mode, and the resulting images were
processed using Nanoscope analysis version 1.4.
SAXS Data Acquisition. SAXS data were collected on a
synchrotron BM-29 beamline at the European synchrotron
radiation facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France. In each case, 30 μL
of sample and buffer were exposed to X-rays while flowing
through the 1.8 mm-diameter quartz capillary using the sample-
changer robot for 10 s at 10 °C. Scattered X-rays were detected
by using a 1 M pilatus detector with a detector distance of
2.867 m. Initial data analysis was done using beamline software,
BsxCuBE27 (Biosaxs Customized Beamline Environment). The
desmearing and subtracted files obtained by BsxCuBE software
were further processed using ATSAS suite 2.8.2.
SAXS Data Analysis and Modeling. The desmeared I(Q)
files were analyzed using Guinier analyses presuming a globular
and rod-like scattering shape of the scattering particles which
yielded the radius of gyration (Rg) and the radius of cross
section (Rc). These analyses were done using the SAS data
analysis program in the ATSAS 2.8.2 suite of programs. Kratky
plots (I(Q) × Q2 vs Q) of each data set were prepared to
examine the nature of scattering protein in the solution. After
confirmation of the globular scattering profiles, the distance
distribution program of SAS data analysis was employed to
perform indirect Fourier transformation of the scattering data
to obtain a pairwise distribution function of interatomic vectors,
P(r). During the transformation, the probability of finding a
pairwise vector equal to 0 Å and the maximum linear dimension
(Dmax) was considered to be zero. To visualize the predominant
solution shape of each protein, 10 independent uniform density
models were generated using Dammin software for each data
set. Finally, the refined and averaged models were used for
comparison and superimposition with the crystal structure
(PDB entry 3FFN).
Mass Spectrometry. An Ultraflex Extreme MALDI-TOF/
TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
C
used for determining intact protein mass and identification of
peptides incorporated in the amyloid aggregates. End-stage
amyloid aggregates were aliquoted in microcentrifuge tubes that
were rinsed in USP-grade ethanol followed by Milli-Q water
and air-dried before use. In order to disaggregate the fibrils,
urea was added to a final concentration of 6 M (100 μL in Tris
buffer), and the samples were incubated overnight at room
temperature. Following this, DTT was added to a final
concentration of 10 mM, and samples were left for an
additional 1 h incubation time. Next, sample alkylation was
achieved by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40
mM, and the samples were incubated for 1 h at room
temperature. After this, Milli-Q water was added to the samples
to decrease the final urea concentration to ∼0.6 M for optimal
trypsin activity. Trypsin was added (∼20 μg) to the samples,
and digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C. The next day,
the reaction was stopped, and the samples were concentrated
by evaporation, mixed with trifluoroacetic acid (0.1% v/v), and
taken up in a C18 ZipTip (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
USA). Finally, the samples were stepwise eluted with increasing
concentrations of acetonitrile (20−60% v/v) in trifluoroacetic
acid (0.1% v/v). Samples were analyzed using MALDI-TOF/
TOF MS in linear mode with sinapinic acid as the matrix. The
generated peptides were analyzed and catalogued using
Compass HyStar 3.2, Data Analysis 4.1, and BioTools 3.2
software (Bruker Daltonics). Further identification was done
using MS/MS ion search through the Mascot search engine
with a mass tolerance of ±0.5 Da and a maximum missed
cleavage of 1.
Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics (REMD) Simu-
lations. The available X-ray crystal structure of WT gelsolin
(PDB entry 3FFN) was utilized for all MD simulations. The
systems are described in the Supplementary Methods of the
Supporting Information. REMD enhances the conformational
sampling by allowing the exchange of configurations between
multiple replicas simulated over a wide range of temperatures in
parallel.28 The exchange of configurations allows crossing of
energy barriers as they travel from lower temperature replicas
to higher temperature replicas with the canonical Boltzmann
distribution preserved in all replicas. In our study, we have used
50 replicas in the temperature range of 310−370 K with an
optimal distribution of temperatures to achieve exchange
probability of ∼0.2−0.3. Exchanges have been attempted
every 1 ps. Initially, NVT equilibration runs were performed
using a V-rescale thermostat for ∼2 ns at each temperature.
The NVT production run was continued for 100 ns for each
replica, amounting to a cumulative run length of 5 μs. In all
simulations, the particle mesh Ewald method was used to
describe the long range electrostatic interactions with a Leap
frog integrator with an integration time step of 2 fs being used
to solve Newton’s equation of motion, and trajectories have
been saved every 50 ps.
■ RESULTS
Preparation of Recombinant Wild-Type and Mutant
Gelsolin. Both the WT and D187N mutant proteins were
bacterially overexpressed and purified using anion exchange and
size-exclusion chromatography as described in Materials and
Methods. The molecular masses of the purified recombinant
Figure 2. Comparative biochemical profiles of WT and D187N mutant gelsolin. (A) Size-exclusion chromatography profile of WT (black) and
mutant gelsolin (red). The inset shows the standard curve for a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column. (B) Far-UV CD spectra. (C) Intrinsic tryptophan
fluorescence emission curves. (D−F) Visualization of F-actin-depolymerization activities of both gelsolin variants. F-actin was incubated with buffer
alone (control, 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.5) or with either gelsolin variant at a molar ratio of 1:5 (gelsolin/actin) in buffer containing 1 mM CaCl2,
and the depolymerization activity was observed by negative stain electron microscopy after a 2 h incubation. Scale bars represent 100 nm in each
case.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
D
proteins were determined by SDS-PAGE and MALDI-MS as
∼88 kDa (Figures S1 and S2). Further, when checked for
monodispersity using analytical size-exclusion chromatography
(SEC), the WT and mutant gelsolin showed uniform peaks
with retention volumes of 13.7 and 13.5 mL, respectively
(Figure 2A). This suggested a monomeric nature for both of
the proteins under physiological conditions. A slight decrease in
the retention volume of the mutant protein was observed,
which could be due to partial opening of the G2 domain as
reported earlier.29,30 All data were determined for Ca2+-free
proteins (in the presence of 1 mM EGTA), and further
experiments were carried out under similar conditions unless
mentioned explicitly.
The D187N Mutation Alters Fold Architecture and
Actin-Severing Activity. The secondary and tertiary
structures of both proteins were analyzed using far-UV CD
and intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence, respectively. The far-UV
CD spectra of the WT gelsolin showed a negative peak at 210
nm with a depression at 215 nm, indicating a mixed α/β-type
secondary structure which was in accordance with the available
crystal data31 (Figure 2B).
The mutant, however, showed a marginal shift in both of
these peaks indicating an alteration in its secondary structure as
compared to that of the WT protein. Upon analysis of
secondary structural content at physiological conditions (pH
7), a significantly reduced α-helicity (>45%) was noted for the
mutant protein (Table S1). Further, the tryptophan emission
profile showed maxima at 332 and 334 nm for WT and mutant
proteins, respectively (Figure 2C). A red-shift in the mutant
protein suggested an increase in solvent exposure of tryptophan
residues. Since the G2 domain containing the D187N mutation
is partially opened, we speculate the increase in solvent
exposure to tryptophan residues (W180, W200; Figure S4)
inside this domain. However, the contribution of other
tryptophan residues close to the G2 domain also cannot be
ruled out. Further, we found that the D187N mutant gelsolin
exhibited a considerable loss in its ability to sever filamentous
actin as compared to the WT protein (see Supplementary
Methods). Electron microscopy showed that WT gelsolin
reduced actin filaments of ∼10−12 nm dimensions to smaller
fragments and monomers (∼2−4 nm) efficiently. In contrast,
after similar incubation periods, the D187N mutant gelsolin
Figure 3. Structural comparison of WT and D187N gelsolin variants. (A) SAXS data profile showing double logarithmic intensity versus Q plot for
WT (blue) and D187N (red) gelsolin. The inset shows a linear fit in the Guinier region. (B) Kratky plot for the WT and mutant gelsolin. (C)
Pairwise distribution plot for WT and mutant gelsolin. SAXS envelopes of WT gelsolin (D−F) and D187N mutant gelsolin (G−I) and their overlay
with the crystal structure of gelsolin (PDB entry 3FFN) shown in different orientations.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
E
incubated samples still showed a significant population of intact
actin filaments (Figure 2D−F).
WT and Mutant Gelsolin Exhibit Similar Global
Shapes at Physiological Conditions. To gain insights into
the global shape and quaternary structure, SAXS data profiles
from solutions of both of the proteins were analyzed. Data
acquired from solutions of WT and D187N mutant gelsolin in a
physiological buffer (50 mM TrisCl, pH 7) under calcium-free
conditions and a 24 h incubation were analyzed, and the shapes
were constructed. SAXS Intensity I(Q) profiles indicated a lack
of aggregation or interparticulate nature in both WT and
mutant gelsolin samples (Figure 3A). Monodispersity in the
samples was confirmed by a linear fit in the Guinier region
(inset, Figure 3A). The slope of the linear fit in the Guinier
region yielded Rg values of 3.27 and 3.28 nm for the WT and
mutant gelsolin, respectively, presuming the globular nature of
the scattering particle in both samples (Table 1). Similarly, Rc
values were found to be 1.65 and 1.69 nm, respectively,
presuming a rod-like nature of the scattering particle. From
these Rg and Rc values, the theoretical persistent length (L) of
the scattering particle was calculated as ∼11.2 nm for both
proteins. Further, Kratky analysis also confirmed the globular
nature of both proteins (Figure 3B). P(r) analysis done by the
distance distribution function of SAXS data using the indirect
Fourier transformation showed similar Dmax values for WT and
mutant gelsolin, at ∼9.1 nm (Figure 3C). Additionally, volume
correlation (VC)-based analysis of scattering particles using the
DATMOW program yielded molecular mass values (87.6 and
88.2 kDa, respectively) very close to that of monomeric
proteins and in agreement with the SEC profile. Subsequently,
global shapes of the proteins in solution were computed using
SAXS data profiles. The generated SAXS envelopes were then
superimposed on the available crystal structure of gelsolin31
(PDB entry 3FFN). Shape restoration after automated
alignment of inertial axes of SAXS-based envelopes using
SUPCOMB largely matched the crystal structure and affirmed
the compact globular shape of both proteins (WT, Figure 3D−
F; D187N, Figure 3G−I).
The D187N Mutation Decreases the Thermodynamic
Stability of Gelsolin. The relative structural stabilities of the
two proteins were studied by thermal unfolding at pH 7. Far-
UV CD spectra (210 nm) were monitored as a function of
increasing temperature. Both WT and mutant gelsolin unfolded
with a single transition over the temperature range of 20−90
°C (Figure 4A). Both of the proteins started to lose native
secondary structure (change in 210 nm band) above 45 °C and
precipitated into large visible aggregates beyond 60 °C with an
apparent loss of CD signal. Since the thermal refolding curves
were irreversible, a reliable estimate of free energy (ΔG) could
not be determined. The resulting curves were analyzed, and Tm
(melting temperature) was calculated. Tm is the temperature
where half of any protein population is denatured and thus can
be used for a comparative estimate of stability between two
proteins. The Tm values of WT and mutant gelsolin were found
to be ∼54 and 51 °C, respectively, indicating a destabilizing
effect of the D187N point mutation (Table 2).
Table 1. Structural Parameters of SAXS Data Collected for Wild-Type (WT) and D187N Mutant Gelsolin and Their Variations
after 0 and 72 h of Incubation As Deduced from Guinier Analyses and Indirect Fourier Transformation
0 h 72 h
Guinier analyses
Indirect Fourier
Transformation Guinier analyses
Indirect Fourier
Transformation
protein Rg (nm) Rc (nm) L (nm) Dmax Rg (nm) Rg (nm) Rc (nm) L (nm) Dmax Rg (nm)
WT (pH 7) 3.27 1.65 11.2 9.1 3.02 3.29 1.7 9.76 9.2 3.24
D187N (pH 7) 3.28 1.69 11.23 9.13 3.07 3.59 1.73 10.9 9.3 3.12
WT (pH 2) 5.23 2.16 16.5 17 5.51 5.28 2.1 16.7 18 5.51
D187N (pH 2) 6.06 2.32 20.8 22 6.9 a a a a a
aCould not be computed.
Figure 4. Comparative assessment of thermodynamic stability. (A) Thermal denaturation of WT (black) and D187N mutant gelsolin (red) probed
by monitoring secondary structure changes (θ210) with increasing temperature. First derivatives (dθ/dT) of normalized melting curves are shown
where the maxima indicate Tm (melting temperature) of the corresponding system. The inset shows normalized raw data represented as percent
unfolding induced by temperature increments for both systems. (B) Normalized equilibrium unfolding and refolding curves of gelsolin variants at pH
7.0 after 12 h of incubation at 25 °C. In each case, the plot of the fractional change in the wavelength maxima of the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence
of the WT (black) and mutant (red) gelsolin with increasing molar concentrations of GdnCl is shown. The inset shows the linear free energy
extrapolation curve of WT and D187N mutant proteins with respect to GdnCl concentrations. The free energy in the absence of denaturant (G0D) is
the intercept on the y-axis, obtained using the linear extrapolation method.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
F
Further, the destabilizing effect of the D187N mutation was
studied using equilibrium unfolding experiments. The intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence for both proteins was monitored
against increasing denaturant (urea and GdnCl) concentrations.
Interestingly, even in the presence of >5 M urea, both proteins
resisted complete unfolding as the λmax did not shift beyond
347 nm, indicating only partial unfolding.
However, in the presence of GdnCl, both proteins started to
show gradual unfolding starting at 1 M GdnCl (λmax = 341 nm,
WT; λmax = 345 nm, D187N), reaching complete unfolding at
2.5−3.0 M GdnCl (λmax = 352 nm, WT; λmax = 356 nm,
D187N) (Figure S5). The unfolding curves overlapped with the
refolding curves for both proteins, indicating attainment of
equilibrium. Both proteins exhibited a sharp sigmoidal
transition, suggesting cooperative unfolding/refolding through
a reversible two-state process (Figure 4B). The data were fitted
according to the nonlinear equation described in Materials and
Methods, and values of free energy in the absence of denaturant
(G0D), cooperativity (m), and the midpoint of unfolding
transition (Cm) were obtained for each system (Table 2). As
per the fits, G0D and m values calculated for WT were 2.8 kcal/
mol and 1.5 M, respectively, and for the D187N mutant were
1.9 kcal/mol and 1.1 M, respectively. Lower G0D and m values
observed for mutant gelsolin indicated a loss of stability and
cooperativity due to destabilization of the protein structure.
Also, a comparatively lower denaturant concentration was
Table 2. Conformational Stability Parameters of the WT and
D187N Mutant Gelsolin Proteinsa
Thermal
denaturation GdnCl unfolding/refolding
protein Tm (°C)
ΔG0D
(kcal mol−1)
M
(kcal mol−1 M−1) Cm (M)
WT 54.1 ± 0.4 2.8 ± 0.1 1.5 ± 0.1 1.9 ± 0.2
D187N 51.5 ± 0.5 1.9 ± 0.2 1.1 ± 0.1 1.7 ± 0.1
aThe melting temperatures (Tm) for WT and D187N gelsolin were
calculated from CD thermal denaturation curves (θ210). Unfolding
studies were done at various concentrations of urea and GdnCl as
described in Materials and Methods. The Cm and ΔG0D values are
based on three independent experiments for each measurement and
are represented as mean and standard deviation. All experiments were
carried out at pH 7.
Figure 5. Assessment of pH-based structural transitions in gelsolin variants. (A) Tertiary structural changes monitored by changes in intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence (λmax) with pH gradient. (B) Surface hydrophobicity changes monitored by ANS fluorescence (intensitymax) with pH
gradient. (C) SAXS data based on a double logarithmic plot of intensity versus Q for gelsolin variants incubated at pH 7 and 2 for 0 and 72 h. The
inset shows fits in the Guinier region for all systems. (D) Kratky plot for gelsolin variants incubated at pH 7 and 2 for 0 and 72 h. A vertical line
demarcates the peaks close to 1.73 depicting the globular shape. All systems are indicated with mentioned color traces.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
G
required to unfold the mutant protein as evident from a
decrease in the Cm value.
The D187N Mutant Exhibits Altered Conformation
and a Higher Rate of Aggregation at Low pH. At this
stage, we were interested in understanding the implications of
the destabilized nature of mutant gelsolin under Ca2+ depleted,
low pH conditions. This is important since gelsolin, which
otherwise attains an actin-competent, open structure in the
presence of Ca2+, also unwinds into a similar conformation at
low pH.12 Upon equilibraton with different buffers in a range of
pH values, a gradual opening of the structure was observed in
both of the gelsolin variants at acidic pH. From the far-UV CD
signatures of both of the proteins, we found that they gradually
lose their native α/β conformation during stepwise lowering of
pH (Figure S3). As discussed earlier, the mutant gelsolin
harbored natively lower helical content at pH 7 that decreases
drastically on further lowering of the pH. Interestingly, the loss
of helicity in the WT protein (∼70%, pH 7 to 2) was
comparatively higher than that in the mutant protein that also
showed relatively higher residual β-sheet content at pH 2
(Table S1). Further, tertiary structural changes studied using
fluorescence spectroscopy showed a cooperative increase in
λmax (332 to 342 nm) of WT gelsolin in the acidic pH range
(pH 6 to 2), indicating exposure of buried tryptophans (Figure
5A). Interestingly, the D187N mutant remained in a closed
conformation until pH 5 (λmax = 334 nm) and showed an
abrupt increment in λmax (339 nm, pH 4) at lower pH values.
At low pH, striking differences were observed between the
mutant and the WT proteins. The mutant gelsolin exhibited a
tertiary structural perturbation at pH 2 (λmax = 345 nm) larger
than that of the WT gelsolin (λmax = 341 nm).
To further validate the tertiary structure perturbation and
exposure of tryptophans in both proteins, we performed
tryptophan (Trp) quenching experiments using acrylamide
(Figure S6). The acrylamide quenching experiments divulged
information about changes in the local environment of
Figure 6. Characterization of aggregation in gelsolin variants. (A) Changes in ThT fluorescence plotted as a function of time to represent
aggregation kinetics of WT (black) and D187N mutant gelsolin (red) proteins. (B) Circular dichroism-based secondary structural assessment of
native proteins (WT and D187N) and their aggregates formed after a 150 h incubation under pH 2 conditions. Assessment of aggregate morphology
by negative stain electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy for aggregates formed by WT (C−E) and mutant gelsolin (D−F). The images
were taken after a 1 week incubation in each case.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
H
tryptophan residues in proteins. A higher Stern−Volmer
quenching constant (Ksv) indicates higher accessibility of
Trps to the quencher acrylamide. Interestingly, at pH 2, the
D187N mutant exhibited a significantly lower Ksv value (>50%
reduction) as compared to the value for WT gelsolin, indicating
lower penetration of the quencher (Table S2). This indicated a
subdued hydrophobic exposure in the mutant protein even at a
very low pH. Our notion was corroborated by the considerable
difference in hydrophobicities between the WT and mutant
proteins under identical conditions. ANS fluorescence (depict-
ing surface hydrophobicity) of the mutant gelsolin remained at
least 4-fold lower than that of the WT protein at low pH values
(pH 5 to 2, Figure 5B). With no visible precipitation and in the
absence of complete unfolding (as achieved by GdnCl > 3 M,
λmax = 355 nm, Figure S5), this decreased surface hydro-
phobicity of the mutant gelsolin could be due to sequestration
of hydrophobic patches during the formation of soluble
oligomers.
To ascertain this, we next investigated the particle size profile
of gelsolin variants equilibrated at different pHs using DLS
(Figure S7). We found that mutant gelsolin exhibited a
dramatic increase in size distribution extending from hydro-
dynamic radii (Rh) of 5−7 nm at pH 7 to 100−140 nm at pH 2.
Under identical conditions, the Rh values for the WT protein,
however, showed only a gradual rise with particle sizes ranging
between 15 and 18 nm. Together, these results indicate that
mutation-induced destabilized structural conformers of gelsolin
promote extensive protein−protein interactions to form higher
order oligomeric structures.
To get the structural perspective, we analyzed the SAXS data
profiles and found that both proteins showed significantly high
intensities when incubated at pH 2 as compared to pH 7
(Figure 5C). The observed high intensity depicts a
polydispersed oligomeric nature of proteins in solution. The
intensity plots at pH 2 showed an upward trend at a low Q
range hinting toward rod-shaped protein aggregates. Interest-
ingly, the intensity at pH 2 was found to be significantly higher
for the mutant gelsolin as compared to that of the WT gelsolin.
This directly correlates to a higher extent of structural
unwinding and interprotein associations (high Rg) in the
mutant gelsolin, enforcing higher aggregation as compared to
that of the WT. Further, extended incubation at pH 7 (up to 72
h) showed only minor changes in SAXS shape parameters for
both proteins with the least deviation in Rg and Rc values,
indicating marginal structural perturbation (Figure 5C, Table
1).
However, the SAXS data of 72 h incubated WT and D187N
mutant proteins at pH 2 showed high intensity profiles.
Interestingly, the mutant gelsolin showed a dramatic increase in
higher order aggregates with an unusual Guinier pattern (inset,
Figure 5C). This corroborated a normalized Kratky analysis,
where the mutant gelsolin showed the formation of a hyperbola
plateau indicating a high level of disorderness (Figure 5D).
Owing to high polydispersity, further analysis and modeling
was not possible. This was in contrast to the proteins at pH 7
(72 h incubated) that each showed a distinct peak close to 1.73,
depicting their globular nature. Overall, these observations
indicated that low pH induces the formation of higher order,
aggregation-prone species in the mutant gelsolin which were
further characterized using dye-based assays and microscopic
analysis.
D187N Mutant Gelsolin Forms Amyloid-like Aggre-
gates at Low pH. We next monitored the aggregation of WT
and D187N gelsolin incubated at different pH buffers using the
standard thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence assay. Enhancement
in ThT fluorescence during aggregation is attributed to the
formation of fibrillar amyloid-like aggregates.26,32 We found an
increase in ThT fluorescence for D187N gelsolin protein
incubated in pH 2 and 4 buffers only. However, the D187N
gelsolin showed significantly high ThT fluorescence on
extended incubation at pH 2 (Figure 6A).
When plotted against time, this fluorescence data traced a
typical sigmoidal curve with a distinct lag phase of ∼47 h
followed by an exponential phase of ∼150 h that saturated after
200 h. In the case of pH 4 incubated D187N gelsolin, the rise in
ThT fluorescence was noted only after more than a month of
incubation and was not characterized further. The far-UV CD
signal recorded after 150 h of incubation showed a discrete
hump at 215 nm, suggesting that mutant gelsolin attained a β-
sheet rich conformation (Figure 6B). In contrast, the WT
gelsolin exhibited only a loss in CD signal with a nearly
unchanged signature.
To further ascertain differences in the aggregate types, a
Congo red (CR) binding assay was performed (Figure S8). The
mutant protein aggregates showed a distinct red-shift in their
CR absorbance spectra that corroborated the formation of
amyloid-like aggregates as reported earlier.33,34 Further, the
TEM images of end-stage aggregates (1 week incubated)
showed the presence of a fibrillar population in the case of
mutant gelsolin which was characteristically absent in the WT
samples (Figure 6C, D). The supporting AFM images showed
that while the WT gelsolin formed large spherical, disc-like
aggregates of heterogeneous sizes, the mutant gelsolin showed
mature fibrils with an average thickness and heights of 4.8 and
8.1 nm, respectively (Figure 6E, F). We next characterized
these end-stage fibrillar aggregates by a fibril disaggregation
assay followed by peptide mass fingerprinting. The small tryptic
fragments generated from disaggregated fibrils showed a top
hit-score of 106, matching that of the human gelsolin protein,
and a sequence coverage of 42% (Figure 7).
It was found that the identified tryptic peptides matched
fragments from the entire protein sequence (Table S3). This
also included the previously reported amyloidogenic fragment
comprising residues 173−243 present in the G2 domain.32 In
all, the data suggested the involvement of intact mutant gelsolin
or a major structural component in contrast to the previously
described proteolytic pathway mostly driven by 5−8 kDa
fragments.35,36 At this stage, it was necessary to understand the
role of the D187N mutation in the loss of structural integrity of
gelsolin and its conversion to an aggregation-prone conformer
that forms fibrillar aggregates under low pH conditions.
The D187N Mutation Alters the Structural Integrity of
the G2 Domain. To further understand the loss of structural
integrity and predisposition to the amyloid state due to a
D187N mutation in gelsolin, we carried out constant pH all-
atom molecular dynamics simulations. Simulation trajectories at
pH 7 and 2 for both the WT and D187N mutant gelsolin were
analyzed. Backbone RMSD variations for the D187N mutant at
pH 2 during the last ∼50 ns showed the highest deviation from
the initial starting structure as compared to other systems
(Figure S9A). However, only marginal changes in the overall
gyration radius (Rg) were observed in all systems (Figure S9B).
Additionally, free energy landscapes (FELs) were constructed
to sample the lowest free energy conformations attained by the
proteins in different systems during the simulations. The Gibbs
free energy surfaces were projected using previously analyzed
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
I
variables: Rg and backbone RMSD. For the WT system at both
pHs, the lowest free energy conformations were restricted to
the conformational space close to the original starting structure
with minimal changes in the gyration radius (Figure S10A, B).
However, for D187N gelsolin at both pHs, the conformational
subspace drifted, with the lowest free energy conformations
having slightly higher Rg values (∼2.88 nm) compared to those
of the WT system (∼2.82 nm) (Figure S10C, D). Interestingly,
we found that the D187N mutant gelsolin at pH 2 occupied a
larger part of the conformational space. In this system, two
separate lowest energy basins could be observed, which might
represent metastable states attained by the mutant during
simulations (cyan arrows, Figure S10C).
Since gelsolin is a large multidomain protein, mapping the
entire pathway of its transition to an amyloid-competent state
using constant temperature simulations was computationally
challenging. This was due to sampling limitations for major
conformational changes in all-atom simulations performed at
room temperature (310 K). Thus, we resorted to REMD
(replica exchange molecular dynamics) simulations of mutant
gelsolin at pH 7 and 2 for sampling conformational changes. To
understand its role in the loss of structural integrity in gelsolin,
the observations were mainly focused on the G2 domain
carrying the D187N mutation. Structural parameters, such as
Cα-RMSD, number of protein−solvent contacts, changes in
solvent accessibility, and radius of gyration, were studied for
D187N mutant gelsolin at pH 7 and 2 using individual replicas
in the temperature range of 310−370 K (Figure 8). It is evident
that while traversing from low to high temperatures, the protein
will partially denature into metastable states. Consequently, the
stability of mutant gelsolin under both pH conditions can be
sampled in terms of its resistance to lose its structural integrity
with temperature increments (at 310, 330, 350, and 370 K). At
pH 7 and 2, probability distributions for RMSD of around ∼0.5
nm were observed at all temperatures (Figure 8A, B).
Interestingly, multiple distributions for protein−solvent con-
tacts were observed at different temperatures in both systems.
With the increase in temperatures, the total number of solvent
contacts gradually increased for the mutant at pH 2 with the
highest number of contacts (∼1450) observed at 370 K (Figure
8C, D).
However, at pH 7, even at higher temperatures no such
increment in contacts was observed as it remained lower than
the system at 310 K. Subsequently, free energy landscapes
(FELs) of each system were constructed and projected as a
function of RMSD and the number of protein solvent contacts
at different temperatures (Figure S11). For the D187N mutant
at pH 2, the lowest free energy conformations showed a
marginally higher solvent contact frequency (∼50 contacts) as
compared to that of corresponding mutant systems at pH 7 at
each temperature. Further, we narrowed down our analysis to
the G2 domain at 350 K, since the manifestation of D187N
mutations could be immediately observed in this domain and
can be attributed as a triggering point of aggregation. For
sampling, the preferred conformational space of G2 at pH 2
and 7 FELs was plotted as a function of solvent accessible area
and number of contacts with the solvent (Figure S12). At pH 2,
the G2 domain showed the presence of more than one
distributed low free energy basin corresponding to states with
higher solvent accessibility and correspondingly more solvent
contacts.
On the other hand, the lowest free energy state at pH 7 still
showed intact fold architecture with a lower number of solvent
contacts. This was also validated through an increased loss in
structural architecture within the G2 domain at pH 2 compared
to that at pH 7. To further investigate these structural
transitions, FELs were constructed using a number of residues
forming α-helix and β-sheet formations in the G2 domain. At
pH 2, multiple lowest free energy basins were observed,
corresponding to structures with reduced helix−beta content
and increased unstructured content (black arrows, Figure 8E).
However, at pH 7, most of the helical and β-sheet regions were
conserved even at 350 K with a single lowest free basin for the
system (Figure 8F). The representative structures at pH 2
sampled from the lowest free energy basins show a pertinent
loss of structural components with apparent β-coil transitions as
was observed as compared to those of the pH 7 system (insets,
yellow arrows, Figure 8E, F).
■ DISCUSSION
Gelsolin amyloidogenesis ensues when a mutation in its G2
domain (core Ca2+ binding domain) makes the protein
susceptible to furin and MT1-MMP mediated cleavage to
produce 5 or 8 kDa amyloidogenic fragments.7,36 In fact, the
proteolysis pathway, as well as amyloid formation by gelsolin
fragments, has been targeted for developing new therapeutic
interventions against gelsolin-related amyloidosis.18,32,37,38
While aggregation and deposition of these fragments are
quite evident, the concomitant physiological environment
inside the cell has yet to be investigated. This is important
since several secondary pathways contribute to amyloid-
associated tissue impairment and death. In the case of
gelsolin-related amyloidosis, severe mitochondrial abnormalities
along with high serum lactate production have been reported.21
Interestingly, modulation of the actin cytoskeleton by the
gelsolin also plays a key role in regulating vacuolar H+-ATPase
(V-ATPase) recycling. Moreover, the modulation of the actin
Figure 7. Analysis of end-stage amyloid aggregates using mass
spectrometry. Identification of the peptide sequences incorporating
amyloid fibrils formed by D187N mutant gelsolin using mass
spectrometry. The MALDI-TOF MS spectrum of peptide fragments
present in the disaggregated fibrils after treatment with trypsin and
subsequent elution in 60% acetonitrile using C18 ZipTip clean up.
The inset shows a Mascot score histogram where protein scores
greater than 56 are significant (p < 0.05). The tryptic fragments
generated from disaggregated fibrils showed a top hit-score of 106,
matching that of the human gelsolin protein, and a sequence coverage
of 42%.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
J
cortex by Ca2+ activated gelsolin represents a common
mechanism by which cells regulate their rate of proton
secretion.39 Thus, it is very likely that the presence of mutant
gelsolin with low Ca2+ sensitivity and subdued actin modulation
capacity could contribute to the H+ balance in cellular
compartments. During the late/progressive phases of gelsolin
amyloidosis, this may further induct an alternate H+ rich but
Ca2+ depleted environment, resulting in several alternative
aggregation pathways.
To understand the biophysical basis of these alterations, we
compared structural stabilities and aggregation propensities of
WT and D187N mutant gelsolin proteins under low pH
conditions. Although the mutant showed a considerable loss in
actin-depolymerization activity, at physiological conditions both
mutant and WT gelsolins retained fairly identical global shapes.
However, on studying thermal and denaturant mediated
unfolding of both proteins, we identified that the D187N
mutant showed considerable instability as compared to the WT
(Figure 4). Evidently, the D187N mutation in the G2 domain
also incurs a loss in folding cooperativity (lowered Cm value,
Table 2), which loosens the structure and increases its
hydrodynamic volume, as is apparent in its SEC profile (Figure
2A). The loss in cooperativity and altered domain unwinding in
mutant gelsolin was also apparent with an aberrant change in its
tertiary structure with an increasing proton (H+) gradient
(Figure 5). These observations support the notion that in
multidomain proteins, favorable interactions tether domains
together rendering extra stability to individual domains.40
Moreover, specific point mutations adversely affect these
interactions and thus alter the folding and solvation of
individual domains.41,42
In line with the above, mutant gelsolin showed a high
aggregation tendency with an increasing proton gradient. The
mutant gelsolin formed higher order assemblies (Figure S7)
mainly driven by hydrophobic interactions (∼4-fold loss in
surface hydrophobicity, Figure 5B). This was also confirmed by
Figure 8. Structural insights of pH-induced perturbations in mutant gelsolin. The probability distribution of backbone RMSD obtained from REMD
simulations at pH 7 (A) and pH 2 (B). The probability distribution of the number of protein−water contacts at pH 7 (C) and pH 2 (D). Free
energy landscapes (FELs) for the G2 domain of D187N mutant gelsolin. Gibbs free energy surfaces in kcal/mol projected as a function of the
number of residues forming an α-helix and β-sheet at pH 7 (E) and pH 2 (F). Black arrows in (E) show the distribution of species with a lower
number of secondary structural elements than in (F). Yellow arrows in the insets indicate β-coil transitions in structures extracted from the lowest
free energy basins from both FELs.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
K
SAXS analysis at pH 2 that showed comparatively higher
polydispersity in the case of mutant gelsolin (Figure 5C, D). A
prolonged incubation for up to 72 h at pH 2 indicated a high
degree of disorderness and aggregation in mutant gelsolin as
compared to that at the physiological pH (Table 1). In this
regard, the aggregation of mutant gelsolin resembles low pH-
based partial denaturation of tetrameric transthyretin (TTR)
rendering a pro-amyloidogenic state.43 TTR is composed of
four noncovalently attached identical polypeptide chains that
form an ensemble of structures mostly stabilized by a strong
interdomain hydrogen bond network.44 In contrast, the hexa-
domain architecture of gelsolin is stabilized by the presence of
interdomain linkers that covalently tether the domains and
enhance their communication.12,45 Thus, aggregation at low pH
is mostly initiated by oligomerization of the misfolded gelsolin
ensemble as evident from the fluorescence, DLS, and SAXS
experiments.
On extended incubation at low pH conditions, mutant
gelsolin forms ThT responsive aggregates which are fibrillar in
nature as observed by TEM and AFM imaging (Figure 6D, F).
These amyloid-like fibrils result from a sigmoidal transition
constituting oligomerization followed by higher order aggrega-
tion of D187N mutant gelsolin similar to other amyloidogenic
proteins including the 8 kDa gelsolin fragment.26,32,46
Interestingly, fibril disaggregation followed by mass spectrom-
etry suggested the involvement of the entire protein ensemble
in amyloid formation (Table S3). Besides, the absence of
specific proteolytic factors in our assays indicates that this
amyloidogenic pathway is different and possibly an additional
furin-independent pathway. A similar alternate pathway
involving domain swapping and dimerization of G167R mutant
gelsolin has also been reported very recently.47 Nevertheless,
the possibility of an autocatalytic or acid hydrolytic mechanism
releasing amyloidogenic fragments cannot be ruled out. In that
case, it may be similar to the role of nicked lysozyme in
mediating amyloid formation at acidic pH.48 Altogether, low
pH oligomerization of the D187N mutant gelsolin acts as a
prerequisite and rate-limiting step for amyloid aggregation.
Thus, our results suggest the existence of an alternate
oligomerization-dependent pathway besides the previously
known proteolysis-dependent pathway (Figure 9).
It will be interesting to decipher any structural and kinetic
differences in amyloids formed in both pathways through future
studies. Insights obtained through MD simulations supported
our experimental outcomes where mutant gelsolin at pH 2
showed the highest structural deviation from native architecture
substantiated by the presence of alternate low free energy
basins in its conformational space. The effect of low pH could
be manifested in terms of a higher contact frequency with
solvent for mutant gelsolin, signifying possible exposure of
hydrophobic core regions. This could be due to loss of
compactness in the protein which decreases interdomain
communications, resulting in partially opened aggregation-
prone states (Figure 8). Apparently, at low pH, the mutation
carrying the G2 domain of mutant gelsolin showed loss of both
helix and beta contents to form solvent exposed metastable
states, separated by small energy barriers. Structural reorganiza-
tion in the mutant G2 domain was also evident by an overall
increase in the number of intramolecular contacts (351) as
compared to those of the WT G2 domain (325). Upon analysis
of local interactions in the vicinity of mutated residue, the loss
of three native hydrogen bonds involving residues N184 and
Q164 was apparent (Figure S13). This structural loss has been
documented in previous reports that pointed to the loss of β-
sheet in G2 as the primary reason for destabilization associated
with D187N mutation.49 However, more information on the
level of structural destabilization in the G2 domain would
require 19F NMR analysis combined with extensive MD
simulations.
Perhaps, the observed partially opened conformations could
be one of the many triggering states for oligomerization and
later aggregation of D187N mutant gelsolin as observed in our
biophysical and SAXS experiments. Overall, we show that the
pathogenic point mutation in gelsolin protein sufficiently
destabilizes its folded architecture under calcium depleted,
low pH conditions and can induce amyloid-like assembly. Our
study supports the presence of an alternate aggregation
mechanism devoid of the canonical proteolytic cleavage in a
H+ rich but Ca2+ depleted environment during progressive
stages of gelsolin amyloidosis. This is important since
progressive phases of gelsolin amyloidosis accompany a surge
in several noncanonical and secondary pathways that contribute
to amyloid-associated tissue impairment and death. One of
these critical secondary pathways is the rise in the H+ gradient
inside cellular organelles, including the ER. Our data suggest
that the lowering of cellular pH could contribute to the
formation of amyloid-like aggregates by D187N mutant gelsolin
by a furin/MMP-MT1-independent secondary oligomerization-
dependent pathway (Figure 9). In this alternate pathway,
partially active mutant gelsolin oligomerizes and may aid in
inducing a high amyloid load by acting as amyloidogenic seeds.
The existence of similar secondary, proteolysis-independent
pathways involving other gelsolin disease mutants, viz. D187Y
and N184K, cannot be ruled out and should be investigated in
Figure 9. Canonical and proposed aggregation pathways of D187N
mutant gelsolin. In the canonical proteolysis-dependent pathway,
mutant gelsolin gets cleaved by furin to generate a 68 kDa fragment
(C68) that further gets proteolyzed by MT1-MMP-like proteases to
produce 5−8 kDa fragments. These 5−8 kDa amyloidogenic peptide
fragments later get deposited as amyloid fibrils. During an acidosis
scenario, mutant gelsolin may follow an alternate oligomerization-
dependent pathway where it skips the proteolytic pathway and forms
higher order aggregates that later aggregate into amyloid fibrils.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
L
future studies. The experimental evidence presented here has
shed light on the presence of alternate aggregation mechanisms
during gelsolin amyloidosis and can help in the design of better
therapeutics.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*S Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.bio-
chem.8b00039.
Supporting methods and analysis data, including an
actin-depolymerization assay, molecular mass estimation
of proteins, secondary structure estimation, tryptophan
fluorescence, acrylamide quenching, dynamic light
scattering, a Congo Red binding assay, and a list of
tryptic peptide fragments; RMSD and radius of gyration
variation data; free energy landscape projections of all-
atomistic and REMD simulations; hydrogen bond
network assessment (PDF)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: bkundu@bioschool.iitd.ac.in. Phone: +91-11-
26591037.
*E-mail: ashgang@imtech.res.in. Phone: 0172-2636680 ext.
3284.
ORCID
Bishwajit Kundu: 0000-0002-5786-3144
Present Address
§Department of Biochemistry, Deshbandhu College, Delhi
University, New Delhi, India.
Author Contributions
B.K. and A. conceived and coordinated the study. A.S. designed,
performed, and analyzed the data from the experiments, along
with P.A., F.K., and P.R. J.S. performed and analyzed the
computational experiments. S.P.S.Y. performed the SAXS
experiments and analyzed the data. J.S. and S.P.S.Y. contributed
equally to this work. A.S., B.K., and A. wrote the manuscript
with contributions from the other authors. All authors approved
the final version of the manuscript.
Funding
B.K. and A. are grateful for financial support from the Indian
Council of Medical Research[grant number 52/2/2013/BMS]
and the Department of Biotechnology, Government of India,
New Delhi [grant number BT/PR5474/MED/30/824/2012].
A.S., J.S., and S.P.S.Y. acknowledge scholarship support from
ICMR, IIT Delhi, and DST, respectively.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the synchrotron BM-29 beamline
facility at the European synchrotron radiation facility (ESRF),
Grenoble, France, for SAXS data collection. The authors thank
the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi and the CSIR-
Institute of Microbial Technology Chandigarh for infra-
structural support. A.S. is indebted to Dr. Dushyant K. Garg
and Dr. Saurabh Bansal for technical discussions. The authors
acknowledge Arti Kataria, Pankaj Sharma, and Nikita Admane
for help in different experiments. The authors also acknowledge
Subodh Jain for technical assistance in performing the mass
spectrometry experiments.
Biochemistry Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00039
Biochemistry XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
N